docs: add routing rules page (#108)
processout/documentation: source/dashboard/routing-rules.md

---
title: Defining custom routing rules
---

# Defining custom routing rules

By default, Smart Router tries to route each transaction to
the optimal Payment Service Provider (PSP) based on performance
and availability. However, you can override this behavior
if you want to choose your own routing for certain types of
payments.

Smart Router lets you define custom **routing rules**. These rules
select particular PSPs for any transactions that meet a set
of [**filter conditions**](#adding-filter-conditions) that you
specify. For example, you might
choose a subset of your PSPs for all transactions that originate in Europe,
or for payments over a certain amount. You can also set rules
to activate 3DS authentication for transactions, applying parameters to fit
your SCA strategy, or to block unwanted transactions completely.

## Contents

- [Using the rule builder](#using-the-rule-builder)
- [Adding filter conditions](#adding-filter-conditions)
- [Rule priority](#rule-priority)
- [Rule categories](#rule-categories)
- [Code format for rules](#code-format-for-rules)

## Using the rule builder

> Go to [**Dashboard**](https://dashboard.processout.com/)&nbsp;&rsaquo;&nbsp;**Smart-routing**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to [**Dashboard**](https://dashboard.processout.com/)&nbsp;&rsaquo;&nbsp;**Smart Routing**
```

Author: It is actually called "Smart-Routing" (with the dash) in the Dashboard webapp menu, though. I'm happy to change it in the docs now, if you like, but it will need to be changed in the webapp as well, to be consistent.

Reviewer: I’m getting it fixed in the Dashboard, let’s assume it’s consistent everywhere.

---
title: Defining custom routing rules
---

# Defining custom routing rules

By default, Smart Router tries to route each transaction to

> the optimal Payment Service Provider (PSP) based on cost
> and availability. However, you can override this behavior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the optimal Payment Service Provider (PSP) based on performance
and availability. However, you can override this behavior
```

Author: Done.

if you want to choose your own routing for certain types of
payments.

Smart Router lets you define custom **routing rules**. These rules
select particular PSPs for any transactions that meet a set
of [**filter conditions**](#adding-filter-conditions) that you
specify. For example, you might

> choose the same PSP for all transactions that originate in Europe,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
choose a subset of your PSPs for all transactions that originate in Europe,
```

Author: Done

or for payments over a certain amount. You can also set rules

> to activate 3DS authentication for transactions or to block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to activate 3DS authentication for transactions, applying parameters to fit your SCA strategy or to block
```

unwanted transactions completely.

## Contents

- [Using the rule builder](#using-the-rule-builder)
- [Adding filter conditions](#adding-filter-conditions)
- [Rule priority](#rule-priority)
- [Rule categories](#rule-categories)
- [Code format for rules](#code-format-for-rules)

## Using the rule builder

Go to [**Dashboard**](https://dashboard.processout.com/)&nbsp;&rsaquo;&nbsp;**Smart-routing**
to view the current set of routing rules in the **rule builder**.
The page is dvided into 4 sections, one for each type of rule that you can define:

- **Block**: Refuse to process the transaction;

> - **Trigger 3DS**: Issue a [3DS2](https://3dsecure2.com/) challenge for the transaction;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Trigger 3DS**: Issue a 3DS challenge for the transaction;
```
We should consider that the people reading this documentation are aware of what a 3DS is. Moreover, there are no public docs for 3DS (by EMVCo), so we can safely delete this ;)

Author: Done (and I'll watch out for this in other pages as well!)

- **Dynamic 3DS**: Add extra conditions for 3DS2 authentication to a PSP;
- **Route**: Select which PSP will handle the transaction.

Use the **Add another rule** button at the bottom of each category
to define new rules. You can also click the name of an existing rule to
view or edit it and then click the **Collapse** button to hide the rule
editor when you are done.

Each new rule applies to *all* transactions by default. It is generally
more useful to apply rules selectively by adding one or more
[filter conditions](#adding-filter-conditions). For example, if you
believe that payments over &euro;99

> are probably fraudulent then you might create a rule to block any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
should always be authenticated then you might create a rule to trigger 3DS on any
```

Author: Done

transactions that match this condition.

You can also add **tags** to a rule to help you identify it. At its
simplest, a tag just acts a name for the rule. Click the **Tags** text
box and type the name and press Enter to create a new tag.
You can add more than one tag to each rule and you can also use
the same tag text for different rules. This lets you create
groups of related rules. For example, you might use the name of
a PSP as a tag for all rules that route transactions to that PSP. 

When you have finished editing your rules, scroll to the bottom of
the page and click the **Save** button to activate your changes.

## Adding filter conditions

The filters are described by "where" clauses similar to those used

> in the [SQL](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_where.asp) language

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in [SQL](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_where.asp) language
```

Author: Done

> (eg, block transactions *where* the amount paid is more than

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(eg, trigger 3DS *where* the amount paid is more than
```

Author: Done

&euro;99). The conditions in these clauses compare a data value from a transaction
with a value that you supply. Select the transaction data field that
you want to use for your filter from the **where** menu,
which also contains a description for each field. The data type of the
field determines the kinds of comparisons you can use, as shown in the
table below:

| | | |
| -- | -- | -- |
| **Data type** | **Comparisons** | **Example** |
| Numeric | Mathematical operators (<, >, ==, etc) | Amount > 99 |

> | Text | Equal (==) or not equal (!=) | Card country == FR |

Reviewer 2: There's also a condition which is `===` and `!==` on specific conditions, mainly the card bank name.
This condition means that the text is not case sensitive (eg, Societe Generale -> societe generale).

Author: I've added them in the table and explained what they are below it.

data value in transactions within a given time period. For example, you
might use this to block transactions from a card number that gets used more
than 50 times within an hour, which might indicate that the card has been
stolen.

Click the **+** button at the right-hand side of a condition to add an extra
condition to the filter. When two or more conditions are active,
they will be combined using boolean AND (ie, *all* of the
conditions must be satisfied to apply the filter).

## Rule priority

You can rearrange the rules in any of the categories using the
**Drag to order** bar at the right-hand side. During processing,
the rules are activated in the order they appear in the list.
This is important for the routing rules because more
than one rule might apply to a particular transaction and so
the ordering defines a priority system for choosing the right
PSP.

## Rule categories

The sections below explain the rule categories in more detail.

### Block

These rules simply abort any transaction that matches your conditions.
Note that a blocking rule with no filter will block all transactions,
so make sure you set a filter for each blocking rule before saving.

### Trigger 3DS

> The rules in this category request a [3DS2](https://3dsecure2.com/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rules in this category request a 3DS
```

Author: Done

challenge for any transactions that match the filters. Each rule
has a switch to enable or disable it for card verifications.

### Dynamic 3DS

These rules allow more fine-grained control of 3DS2 challenges.
They are applied to a particular PSP *after* that PSP has been chosen
by one of the [routing rules](#route). Use the **On** menu in the
rule editor to choose the PSP that the rule applies to.

The [filter conditions](#adding-filter-conditions) for dynamic 3DS rules
work in the usual way. For transactions that match your filter conditions,
you can add a claim for exemption from 3DS2, specify a challenge indicator
or both. (Note that you can also set these values using

> the Smart Router API. See the description of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ProcessOut API. See the description of the
```

Author: Done

[Invoice](/refs/#invoices) object for more information.)

### Route

Routing rules send the selected transactions to a particular PSP.
As well as the main PSP, you can supply a *fallback* for Smart
Router to use when the main one isn't available. You can also
select **Smart-routing** instead of a PSP. This option

> lets you specify a set of PSPs for the usual smart

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lets you specify a set of PSPs (either on all enabled providers, or a defined subset) for the usual smart
```

routing algorithm to choose from.

> ## Code format for rules

Reviewer 2: I would be keener to not develop on this specific matter.
The reason is that we wish to not over-complexify our merchant understanding of the Smart Router as the targeted people are not engineers.

Could we potentially mask this? Or having a specific documentation on it?

Author: I've moved the stuff about the code format out into a separate page (it looks like a "subpage" in the sidebar) but I'll remove it completely if you prefer.

this:

```
block{
    gateways: ;
    condition: velocity{path:card_fingerprint; interval:1h} > 1;
    tags: velocity(card_fingerprint within 1h) > 1;
}

trigger_3ds{
    gateways: ;
    condition: merchant_initiated == false;
    tags: Default 3DS;
    run_for_card_verifications: true
}

route{
    gateways: gway_conf_5kayat82v11r36unnm0downk0odoibdm;
    condition: amount < 30 AND rand() > 0.5;
    tags: 50% dummy gateway,value < 30;
}

dynamic_3ds{
    gateways: gway_conf_5kayat82v11r36unnm0downk0odoibdm;
    condition: card_country == "GB";
    dynamic_3ds_params: {
        sca_exemption_reason: "valid_reason";
        challenge_indicator: "no_preference"
    }
}
```

The text format is similar to [CSS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CSS).
Each rule introduced by its category name (`block`, `route`,
`trigger_3ds`, or `dynamic_3ds`) with
the rule definition inside curly braces. The rule properties are
key-value pairs with a colon after the key name and a semicolon
as a separator between properties. Note that the value part of a
property can be left blank, if appropriate. See the sections
below for details of the available properties.

> ### `condition`

Reviewer 2: There's an additional feature, which has never been pushed, which is the wildcards.
On the card BIN, a merchant can set a subset of numbers which will wildcard with the rest of the card.
Exemple:
`card bin == 42`
will match a card with a number `4242 4242 4242 4242`

There's another wildcard feature on the card bank, where user can add asterisks `*`.
Example:
`card bank === *hsbc*`
Will match the card bank which is `united kingdom hsbc ltd company`

Not sure how those can be listed.

Author: I've added a description of these in the code format page as an extra bit in the "conditions" section.
